Title: CrossProjection: Geometric Grounding Beyond Viewpoint Change in Architectural Drawings

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.00473v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 00:28:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# CrossProjection: Geometric Grounding Beyond Viewpoint Change in Architectural Drawings 

Kaho Li 1 Pengyu Zeng 1 Yuqin Dai 1 Jun Yin 1 Tianjing Feng 2 Shuai Lu 1∗

> 1

Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China 

> 2

UCL Institute for Environmental Design and Engineering, The Bartlett School of Environment, Energy and Resources, University College London, London, UK 

Preprint, August 2026 

Abstract 

Multi-view spatial reasoning is commonly studied with camera images taken from different viewpoints. Architectural drawings pose a different problem. Plans and sections are cuts, while elevations are facade projections; the same component can therefore change appearance for reasons that cannot be reduced to camera motion. We introduce CrossProjection , an anchor-grounded diagnostic that tests whether vision-language models maintain component identity across these representations and can express the correspondence geometrically. The benchmark covers Matching, Registration, and Geometric Grounding through categorical judgments, candidate selection, and free localization of points, lines, and regions. We evaluate three models on 1,954 categorical conditions each, drawn from 23 real drawing sets. GPT-5.5 reaches 82.4% accuracy, Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct 62.2%, and GLM-4.5V 57.2%. A separate matched study of 200 targets varies both the drawing—natural or vector-text-suppressed—and the output interface—closed candidates or free geometry. Closed candidates often improve performance, yet free localization remains unreliable, particularly for lines. On natural drawings, point/region PCK@.05 is 54–76% for GPT, 8–10% for Qwen, and 14–36% for GLM; line endpoint PCK@.05 is 22%, 4%, and 0%, respectively. An answer-independent coordinate grid raises GPT’s strict point/region PCK by 19.7 percentage points but lowers its line endpoint PCK by 4.0 points. Three architecture-trained participants reach 87.3–93.3% categorical accuracy and 76–92% GT-region hit. These results provide a feasibility reference, not a population-level human ceiling. The categorical families do not form a same-item Matching–Registration comparison, and the interface controls change several task demands at once. We therefore make no mechanistic claim. The evidence supports a more limited finding: success with closed choices or marked elements does not entail reliable explicit geometric grounding. In drawing-guided CAD/BIM systems, categorical correctness should not be taken as evidence of candidate-free spatial reliability. Reusable on-sheet anchors, fixed-denominator scoring, and hash-locked artifacts make this discrepancy auditable. 

# 1 Introduction 

Recent work on multi-view spatial reasoning asks models to establish object correspondence, maintain cross-view consistency, and localize targets across images of the same scene [ 1, 10 – 13 ]. These settings 

> ∗

Corresponding author: shuai.lu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn 

1arXiv:2608.00473v1 [cs.CV] 1 Aug 2026 Figure 1: Geometric grounding beyond viewpoint change. (A) Standard multi-view imaging varies camera pose while keeping the image-formation operator fixed. Plans, sections, and elevations instead use horizontal cuts, vertical cuts, and orthographic projection. (B) A shared anchor identifies the same physical window across these representations in a real drawing set. (C) Simplified cartoons show the Judge, Select, and Locate readouts without the visual density of full sheets. They illustrate the tasks; they are neither benchmark samples nor measured results. Select and Locate use the same 200 Grounding-200 targets. The coordinate grid is shown as a matched interface control, not as a fourth capability. Drawing source: Jay Osborne / FreeFarmhouse, American Farmhouse 2020, licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0. The complete composite figure, including our cropping, scaling, anchor overlays, composition, and explanatory operator artwork, is licensed under the same terms. The cartoons and operator artwork are explanatory and encode no measured result. usually vary camera pose while keeping the image-formation process broadly fixed: each view remains a photograph or render of an intact scene. CrossProjection studies a different regime. Its views are produced by heterogeneous geometric operators, so corresponding objects change appearance not only with viewpoint and occlusion, but also with whether the scene is cut or projected. The central question is whether a vision-language model can preserve object identity and recover explicit 2geometry across this change in projection operator. Architectural drawings provide a concrete real-world testbed for this problem (Figure 1). Plans and sections expose horizontal and vertical cut geometry, whereas elevations are orthographic projections. The same window may appear as a break in wall linework, a jamb profile, or a framed rectangle on a facade. No camera transformation maps one of these conventions to another. Architectural drawing sets therefore extend cross-view correspondence beyond viewpoint changes without giving up a shared underlying scene. This distinction matters at the output level. A model may recognize a cross-view relation when the target is marked or supplied as a candidate without being able to localize the corresponding point, line, or region. Categorical accuracy and cross-view consistency alone therefore do not measure the precision of geometric grounding. CrossProjection evaluates both relation judgments and explicit spatial outputs so that these behaviors remain separately observable. The problem also arises in drawing-guided AEC systems. Multimodal agents can now read AEC documents and operate Revit, Rhino, and other CAD/BIM tools through sheet rendering, document parsing, and executable interfaces [ 6 , 16 ]. Yet tool access does not show that an agent can maintain the cross-view relations needed to inspect or revise a design. Lee et al. [4] , for example, handles plan–elevation correspondence with dedicated calibration and cost-matrix/Hungarian matching before BIM instantiation; the LMM is used for scale recognition rather than for geometric matching. This separation makes cross-view correspondence a concrete prerequisite to test, rather than an ability implied by tool use. Engineering benchmarks evaluate floor-plan reading, AEC sheets, and mechanical orthographic drawings [ 2, 3, 5 , 7 ]. Most directly, ArchSIBench tests closed-choice plan–section point correspon-dence [ 9 ]. CrossProjection connects these neighboring settings by evaluating real plan–section– elevation relations under heterogeneous operators and by extending the output from marked or closed choices to candidate selection and free geometric localization. CrossProjection derives three readouts from reusable on-sheet annotations. Matching asks whether marked elements denote the same component. Registration asks for a relation among drawings—a cut location, facade direction, tri-view composition, or window-to-room assignment. 

Geometric Grounding requires the model to select or localize a point, line, or region. These are operational readouts, not an assumed hierarchy. The categorical Matching and Registration families use different items and response spaces, so we report a cross-family profile rather than claiming a causal separation between capabilities. Natural-23-v2 contains 1,954 categorical conditions per model across 23 heterogeneous published drawing sets. A paired predecessor-lineage study removes PDF-vector text from 1,055 questions. Grounding-200 then evaluates 200 shared targets under both renderings and with either closed candidates or free geometry; Grid-200 adds an answer-independent coordinate overlay to the free conditions. Two BIM-derived buildings provide a separate check under a more standardized drawing source. Finally, three independent architecture-trained participants complete a frozen 200-item pilot reference. Their results assess task and interface feasibility, not a population-level human ceiling. All model evaluations use GPT-5.5, Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct, and GLM-4.5V. Our contributions are: 

• an anchor-grounded protocol that relates real plans, sections, and elevations through categorical judgments, candidate selection, and free point, line, and region localization; 

• a three-model study of 23 natural buildings and 200 matched grounding targets, with paired text suppression, a grid control, two separately reported BIM-derived controls, and a three-participant feasibility reference; 3• evidence that success with marked elements or closed choices can coexist with poor explicit localization, particularly for lines; and 

• an auditable chain from questions, images, and GT to model responses, scores, and paper summaries, bound by immutable snapshot and run locks. 

# 2 Related Work 

Cross-view spatial reasoning has been studied in photographs, controlled renders, engineering drawings, and architectural sheets. For our purposes, the key distinction is how the views are produced and what form of correspondence they make available, rather than whether the imagery is architectural. Table 1 groups the closest research settings by view relation, prior contribution, and the question left open. Table 1: Coverage of neighboring research settings and the remaining diagnostic question. The final column describes what CrossProjection adds; it does not imply that the other settings are “solved.” 

Research setting View relation What existing work estab-lishes Diagnostic added by CrossProjec-tion 

Single-drawing AEC understand-ing 

AECV-Bench [ 2 ]; ArchPlanVQA [5] One sheet or one plan; no cross-projection identity constraint OCR-grounded QA, count-ing, symbol recognition, and intra-view spatial or compar-ative relations Whether component identity and cut/view geometry remain con-sistent across plan, section, and elevation 

Photographic multi-view 

MMSI-Bench [ 12 ]; All-Angles [13 ]; CrossPoint-Bench [ 11 ]; MindEdit-Bench [14] Camera-pose changes under a shared perspective-imaging regime Cross-view spatial judgment and point correspondence Replace viewpoint change with heterogeneous cuts and ortho-graphic conventions, where shared texture and camera geometry are insufficient 

Synthetic or coun-terfactual multi-view 

CVT-Bench [10 ]; TriViewBench [1] Controlled renders of an intact scene Controlled viewpoint trans-formations, scene structure, and structural complexity Test real published drawings in which both the projection opera-tor and the representational con-vention change 

Engineering ortho-graphic reasoning 

MechVQA [ 3 ]; CReFT-CAD [ 7 ]; 3ViewSense [15] Homogeneous ortho-graphic views or an in-duced canonical-view scaffold Engineering-drawing under-standing and orthographic-view relations Account for architectural cut logic: a section exposes interior organization rather than rotat-ing the same exterior surface into view 

Architectural cross-drawing precedent 

ArchSIBench [9] Marked plan–section point correspondence among broader archi-tectural tasks Establishes a manually con-structed architectural cross-view evaluation Separate object Matching from drawing Registration and extend the readout from closed judgment and selection to free geometric localization 

Viewpoint-based multi-view reasoning. Photographic benchmarks evaluate questions across real-world views [ 12 – 14 ], while CrossPoint-Bench [ 11 ] isolates cross-view point correspondence. Controlled settings complement them: CVT-Bench [ 10 ] studies counterfactual viewpoint transforma-tions, and TriViewBench [ 1 ] scales structural complexity in synthetic multi-view scenes. Together, these studies show that models can struggle to relate views even when they depict an intact scene 4under camera or rendering changes. Architectural plans and sections transform the scene differently: they cut the building horizontally or vertically, and no change in camera pose maps either cut view to an elevation. CrossProjection tests correspondence across this change in image-formation and drafting operator. It reports object Matching separately from relations among the drawings themselves. 

From engineering projections to architectural drawings. MechVQA [ 3 ] and CReFT-CAD [7] evaluate mechanical drawing and CAD three-view reasoning; 3ViewSense [ 15 ] uses canonical orthographic views as an induced reasoning scaffold from one egocentric image. These settings moti-vate explicit orthographic reasoning, but their views are comparatively homogeneous. Architectural drawing sets follow heterogeneous rules: a plan cuts at a prescribed height, a section cuts along a marked path, and an elevation does not cut at all. AECV-Bench [ 2 ] and ArchPlanVQA [ 5] establish broad single-sheet and floor-plan understanding. ArchSIBench [ 9 ] is the closest cross-drawing precedent: its Same-Dimensional task asks which candidate point in a section corresponds to a marked point in a plan. CrossProjection extends this precedent with reusable component and geometry anchors across plans, sections, and elevations. The same auditable annotation layer supports separately scored Matching and Registration tasks, followed by closed-candidate and free-geometry readouts on shared targets. Vector-level text suppression is evaluated as a paired rendering condition rather than used only as preprocessing. 

Downstream systems and tool-using agents. AEC-Bench [ 6] evaluates agentic work over dense AEC documents, but successful retrieval or rendering alone does not establish fine-grained spatial grounding. In the multi-drawing BIM pipeline of Lee et al. [4] , dedicated perception, calibration, and plan–elevation matching modules precede BIM instantiation. BenchCAD [ 16 ] and Blueprint-Bench [8] also indicate that executable tools, plausible coarse geometry, and iterative revision do not guarantee precise spatial refinement. CrossProjection does not score command execution or artifact quality. It examines one necessary but insufficient prerequisite: maintaining component identity across heterogeneous drawings and returning the correspondence geometrically. This is a specific diagnostic combination, not a claim to be the first multi-view or architectural-drawing benchmark. 

# 3 The CrossProjection Benchmark 

3.1 Collection and ground truth 

The collection comprises 25 buildings, with source modalities reported separately. Natural-23-v2 includes 15 Core/native-drawing buildings and eight Wild buildings. The Core drawings may be redistributed under their source licenses. A later release will represent the Wild drawings through source URLs, hashes, questions, and annotations, without redistributing the source rasters. Two additional GNI buildings, derived from open BIM, form a separate controlled source study and are not pooled with Natural-23-v2. For native and Wild drawings, architecture-trained annotators mark cross-view component identities, room polygons, section-cut lines, elevation sightlines, and the crop for each drawing. Deterministic generators then reuse this sheet-level geometry. For GNI, candidate identities begin with IFC component IDs projected through repaired Revit views. Before question generation, an architecture-trained reviewer checks the model, visibility, and exported drawings. The two paths reflect different source modalities while keeping each scored identity auditable. 5Figure 2: Benchmark construction and evaluation protocol. (A) Published drawings receive architecture-trained manual cross-view and geometric annotation; GNI drawings and initial identities are derived from IFC through repaired Revit views, projected geometry, strict-visible filtering, and human verification. (B) Both routes use one auditable target-record schema and deterministic item generation. (C) Published drawings support the main categorical and Grounding-200 branches. The two GNI buildings support only the separately reported strict-visible Matching control in v1; they do not support Registration or Grounding claims. (D) Metrics remain specific to categorical, candidate, point/region, and line outputs rather than being pooled as one accuracy. The Native example is adapted through cropping, scaling, and overlays from Jay Osborne / FreeFarmhouse, American Farmhouse 2020, CC BY-SA 3.0. The GNI example is adapted from the GNI BIM Dataset v1.0.0, CC BY 4.0; ArchSpatialBench converted/repaired the IFC and generated the derived drawings and GT. The complete composite adaptation, including our crops, transformations, layout, annotations, icons, and explanatory graphics, is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0; incorporated source materials retain their original attribution and license notices. The annotations bind visible evidence across sheets; they do not reconstruct a 3D model. The benchmark thus tests whether a model can recover correspondence from drawing conventions without relying on a hidden mesh that supplies the answer. 

3.2 Task axis and readout ladder 

The evaluation has two orthogonal reader-facing axes. The task axis separates Matching from Registration. A three-step readout ladder specifies the required response: Readout I—Categorical Judgment (Judge), Readout II—Candidate Grounding (Select), and Readout III—Free Geometric Grounding (Locate). The ladder orders answer support and output specificity; it does not assert a monotonic latent ability or empirical difficulty hierarchy. Natural-23-v2 instantiates Readout I. Grounding-200 instantiates Readouts II and III over the same 200 targets; Readout I is not presented as a matched third cell of that experiment. Natural-23-v2 contains 1,954 Readout-I conditions per model across five families: 

• Cross-view Element Matching (1,352): decide whether marked elements in two drawings are the same physical component. 

• Section Registration (100): decide whether a section corresponds to a marked cut line and viewing direction on a plan. 6• Elevation Direction (91): choose which of four sides of the displayed plan an elevation represents. 

• Tri-view Consistency (252): decide whether marked evidence in plan, section, and elevation composes consistently. 

• Window-to-Room Registration (159): decide whether a marked elevation window belongs to a marked plan room. Cross-view Element Matching defines the Matching task axis. The remaining four families define Registration because their labels depend on a relation among sheets. The GT definition fixes this assignment before model performance is examined. All families except Elevation Direction are binary, with chance accuracy .50; Elevation Direction has chance .25. Since the five families differ in item construction and response space, differences between their scores are descriptive rather than a same-item construct test. 

3.3 Grounding-200 and Grid-200 

Grounding-200 samples 50 targets from each of four geometric families: cross-view element points, section-cut or facade lines, tri-view element points, and room regions or window points. The line targets comprise 21 section cuts and 29 facades; the room/window targets contain 40 room regions and ten plan-window points. Each target appears in four cells: Natural with candidates (Readout II), Natural with free geometry (Readout III), text-suppressed with candidates (Readout II), and text-suppressed with free geometry (Readout III), for 800 conditions per model. Candidate labels are randomized within each item, and chance is the item-specific reciprocal of candidate count. Free points and regions use a normalized [0,1000] coordinate; free lines use two endpoints in the same system. Point/region metrics are PCK@.02, PCK@.05, normalized center error, and GT-region hit where applicable. Line endpoints are permutation-invariant and use mean-endpoint and both-endpoints PCK at .02 and .05 plus normalized endpoint error. Grid-200 adds an answer-independent [0,1000] coordinate overlay to the 400 free-geometry cells while leaving source images, targets, prompts, and output schemas fixed. The overlay may help numeric readout, but it also changes visual partitioning and introduces slight occlusion. We therefore treat its effect as interface support rather than a pure coordinate-decoding intervention. 

3.4 Rendering and source controls 

The paired vector-text-suppression study removes PDF text objects before rasterization while retaining vector geometry. It contains 1,055 paired questions per model from the historical root lineage. Natural-23-v2 changed the element-matching prompt and belongs to an independent root lineage, so we do not compute a cross-lineage Natural-23-v2-versus-suppressed gap. The named-layer diagnostic hides additional annotation layers for 52 American Farmhouse conditions. It is one-source evidence only. The GNI source-modality control uses 200 strict-visible Element Matching conditions for gni_model_0 and 172 for gni_model_2. Both buildings are complete for all three models and are reported separately. 

3.5 Three-participant human feasibility reference 

Three independent architecture-trained participants completed the same frozen 200-item protocol using the two fixed counterbalanced orders. H1 and H2 are architecture students with five years of 7architectural-drawing experience; H3 is an architecture PhD with eight years. The protocol contains 150 categorical items—110 Natural questions from the predecessor lineage and 40 strict-visible GNI Matching questions—followed by the FF-50 click-localization diagnostic. The participant-facing service withheld GT, used per-participant credentials, and recorded anonymous background, answers, confidence, active time, visits, and revisions. The reporting cohort was frozen on July 26, 2026, with these three anonymous participants, each of whom completed all 200 items. Inclusion follows a score-independent completion rule. We report participants separately; participant-macro means are descriptive and do not estimate a population human ceiling. The Natural categorical sample belongs to the predecessor prompt lineage and is not compared inferentially with Natural-23-v2. Project-owner-confirmed background corrections are recorded alongside the original participant dropdown values in the audit archive. During data collection, the frontend was repaired to improve inline image fitting and lightbox pan/zoom. Exact per-item exposure before and after the repair was not logged, so we do not attribute differences between participants to the interface. The frozen study document and controlled asset-upload manifest retain their launch SHA-256 values, confirming that question IDs, source image assets, answer options, and GT were not regenerated. Given this history, we use the pilot only as conservative feasibility evidence. 

3.6 Models, scoring, and isolation 

We access GPT-5.5 through the Codex/ChatGPT route and Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct and GLM-4.5V through SiliconFlow. GLM thinking is disabled for rate-limit stability. Each item is submitted as a separate request without ground truth in the model context. We retain raw responses and distinguish task-compatible output from strict adherence to the requested two-line format. All headline accuracies use fixed target denominators: invalid or terminal responses count as incorrect. The Natural-23-v2 denominators are identical across models even when a response is invalid. We report the categorical families separately and do not pool their different chance structures into a single inferential test. Exact requested and returned model identifiers, request metadata, prompts, inputs, responses, correction overlays, scorers, and summaries are bound in the canonical run lock (Appendix B). 

# 4 Results 

4.1 Natural-23-v2: a descriptive cross-family profile 

GPT-5.5 reaches 82.4% overall, with family accuracies from 73.6% to 86.0% (Table 2). Qwen3-VL-32B reaches 62.2% overall and is strongest on Cross-view Element Matching (65.5%); its Registration-family values range from 40.7% to 58.7%. GLM-4.5V reaches 57.2% overall, with 59.0% on Element Matching, 35.2% on Elevation Direction, and 54.0–57.5% on the other Registration families. Coverage after the frozen correction overlay is 1,954/1,954 task-compatible responses for GPT, 1,953/1,954 for Qwen, and 1,952/1,954 for GLM; all-target accuracy retains the one and two invalid responses as incorrect. The open models’ Element Matching values are above binary chance, while several Registration values are closer to their binary or four-way chance levels. These values describe a cross-family performance profile. They do not show that a controlled Registration requirement caused the differences, because the families use different items, prompts, and response spaces. 8Table 2: Natural-23-v2 fixed-denominator accuracy (%). Each model receives the same 1,954 conditions over 23 buildings. Invalid outputs count as incorrect. The family labels are operational readouts; score differences are not a same-item causal contrast. 

# Readout n GPT-5.5 Qwen3-VL-32B GLM-4.5V Overall 1954 82.4 62.2 57.2 Element match 1352 83.4 65.5 59.0 Section reg. 100 86.0 54.0 54.0 Elevation direction 91 75.8 40.7 35.2 Tri-view 252 83.7 58.7 57.5 Window-to-room 159 73.6 56.6 56.0 

Table 3: Paired predecessor-lineage rendering study (% accuracy). Natural −suppressed is a percentage-point difference on a fixed 1,055-pair target denominator; paired-clean n excludes pairs without two task-compatible predictions for the paired test. These Natural values are not the independent Natural-23-v2 lineage in Table 2. 

Model Natural Text-suppressed Natural −suppressed Paired clean n

GPT-5.5 82.7 76.0 +6.7 1029 Qwen3-VL-32B 60.2 53.6 +6.5 1054 GLM-4.5V 56.2 52.1 +4.1 1045 

4.2 Effect of suppressing printed text in the paired lineage 

Within the paired historical lineage, removing PDF-vector text lowers overall accuracy by 6.7 points for GPT, 6.5 for Qwen, and 4.1 for GLM (Table 3). The drop indicates that the models use printed text, but performance after suppression cannot be read as geometry-only. Non-text symbols remain, and the rendering distribution changes. Effects also vary in sign and magnitude across families, while the one-source named-layer check differs by model (section 5). 

4.3 Closed candidates do not guarantee free geometric output 

With an explicit proposal set, the models can often identify a valid candidate. On natural drawings, GPT candidate accuracy is 76–88% across families. Its free point/region PCK@.05 is 54–76%, whereas free line endpoint PCK is 22%. Qwen candidate accuracy is 20–44%; free point/region PCK is 8–10% and line endpoint PCK is 4%. GLM candidate accuracy is 32–50%, with point/region PCK of 14–36% and line endpoint PCK of 0% (Figure 3A–B). Text suppression does not create a uniform ordering. For example, GPT’s Element free PCK rises from 68% to 78% while its candidate accuracy falls from 76% to 66%; Section/facade candidate and free scores both decrease. Qwen and GLM show similarly mixed family effects. Candidate rendering adds target markup and changes both the response space and the proposal burden, so the candidate/free difference cannot isolate search or detection. What remains clear is that a valid closed choice can coexist with poor candidate-free localization, particularly for lines. 9Figure 3: Grounding-200 readout profile. Panels A and B evaluate the same 200 Natural-rendering targets. Candidate values are fixed-denominator exact accuracy; the gray strip gives the mean item-wise random-choice baseline (mean 1/K i). Free values are point/region PCK@.05 except for Section/facade, which uses mean endpoint PCK@.05. Panel C shows matched Grid-minus-no-Grid effects in percentage points, pooled over both renderings. Invalid outputs count as misses. The common color scale aids reading, but Candidate and Free differ in target markup, response space, and metric, so their difference is not a causal estimate of search burden. Full Natural and text-suppressed values are in Table 7 and Table 8. 10 Figure 4: Auditable examples of a correct Candidate choice and a failed Free output for the identical underlying target. All rows use GPT-5.5 and Natural drawings. Eligible examples require valid Candidate and Free responses, 2 ≤ K ≤ 8, exact Candidate correctness, a Free PCK@.05 miss, and, for point/region targets, a GT-region miss. Within each semantic stratum we sort eligible cases by NCE and show the upper median; the pool sizes are 3 Element points, 35 Section/facade lines, and 8 room regions. Green denotes GT and magenta the model’s Free prediction; explanatory overlays are added after scoring. Source drawings: Jay Osborne / FreeFarmhouse Starter Caroline, Backyard Julie, and Starter Marilyn. Each source PDF is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0. The complete composite figure, including our crops, scoring overlays, and composition, is licensed under the same terms. 11 4.4 The coordinate grid helps strict points, not lines 

The grid has a large effect only for GPT’s strict point/region criterion: +19.7 points at PCK@.02, compared with +2.0 for Qwen and +2.7 for GLM (Figure 3C). At the looser PCK@.05 threshold, gains are +4.0, +4.0, and +0.7 points. Line endpoint PCK@.05 changes by −4.0, −1.0, and 0.0

points. The overlay can therefore assist some precise point readout, but it does not resolve line registration. Because the grid also changes the image, we interpret these values as matched interface effects rather than a pure decomposition of numeric coordinate conversion. 

4.5 BIM-derived Matching preserves the model ordering 

On gni_model_0, GPT, Qwen, and GLM reach 84.5%, 62.5%, and 59.0%; on gni_model_2 they reach 82.0%, 54.1%, and 50.0% (Table 4). Both buildings show the same GPT > Qwen > GLM ordering for marked-element Matching under a standardized BIM-derived source. With only two buildings from one series, the result is a source-modality check rather than a generalization estimate. The control contains neither Registration nor free-grounding tasks. 

4.6 Three trained participants provide a feasibility reference 

H1, H2, and H3 reach 87.3%, 88.7%, and 93.3% on the 150 categorical items (Table 5). Their Natural-sample accuracies are 87.3%, 89.1%, and 96.4%, and their GNI Matching accuracies are 87.5%, 87.5%, and 85.0%. On FF-50, GT-region hit is 92%, 76%, and 90%, while PCK@.05 is 94%, 80%, and 90%. Participant-macro categorical accuracy is 89.8%; polygon hit is 86.0% and PCK@.05 is 88.0%. The three trained readers complete the frozen task set with high descriptive accuracy. This small reference does not estimate a population ceiling or support a model–human significance claim. The Natural sample belongs to the predecessor prompt lineage, and subsection 3.5 documents the interface change during collection. Across the model evaluations, useful answers to marked or closed-form questions do not consis-tently translate into reliable point, line, or region output. This finding is best supported by the matched Grounding-200 targets, especially the line results. It does not imply that Matching and Registration are causally separable internal abilities. 

# 5 Controls and Alternative Explanations 

On-drawing text. Natural rendering has an aggregate advantage of 4.1–6.7 points in the paired vector intervention, indicating that printed text provides useful support. Text does not explain the full result: every family remains scorable after suppression, changes differ across families, and Grounding-200 includes both renderings. The 52-condition American Farmhouse named-layer diagnostic also varies by model. Hiding the selected annotation layers changes accuracy by +3.9 points for GPT, −11 .5 for Qwen, and +5.9 for GLM. Since this check uses one source, it only argues against a universal text/symbol-removal effect. 

Output-format compliance. GLM follows the exact two-line Natural-23-v2 format in only 22 of 1,469 original fresh calls (1.5%), but the deterministic compatible parser recovers task-valid outputs from all 1,469. Its spatial score therefore does not treat verbosity as an error. We report strict-format adherence separately from spatial correctness; the two terminal correction errors remain invalid and count as incorrect. A strict-string evaluator would instead misclassify a formatting behavior as a spatial failure. 12 Table 4: Two separately reported GNI BIM-derived Element Matching controls: fixed-denominator accuracy (%) and loglinear d′. Both use the strict-visible protocol. No pooled two-building estimate is reported. 

## Model GNI model_0 ( n = 200 ) GNI model_2 ( n = 172 )GPT-5.5 84.5 ( d′ = +2 .02 ) 82.0 ( d′ = +1 .88 )Qwen3-VL-32B 62.5 ( d′ = +0 .83 ) 54.1 ( d′ = +0 .37 )GLM-4.5V 59.0 ( d′ = +0 .45 ) 50.0 ( d′ = +0 .00 )

Table 5: Three-participant pilot reference. Categorical columns report correct/total (accuracy %); FF-50 columns report free click-localization metrics. The participants completed the same items using two fixed counterbalanced orders. Individual values are reported because n = 3 is not a population-level human ceiling. 

Participant Natural GNI All categorical GT-region hit PCK@.05 H1 96/110 (87.3) 35/40 (87.5) 131/150 (87.3) 92.0 94.0 H2 98/110 (89.1) 35/40 (87.5) 133/150 (88.7) 76.0 80.0 H3 106/110 (96.4) 34/40 (85.0) 140/150 (93.3) 90.0 90.0 

Candidate proposals. Closed candidates alter more than the search space: they mark every proposal, replace coordinates with a discrete answer, and change the target rendering. Their advantage cannot be assigned to a single mechanism. Nor can weak free localization be explained only by difficulty producing coordinates. The grid improves strict point localization for GPT, but line endpoint localization is unchanged or worse for every model. 

Source style. Natural-23-v2 mixes native Core and Wild drawings, while the two GNI buildings use standardized BIM-derived views and component identities. Both GNI buildings show the same Element Matching ordering. This weakens the possibility that the marked-element ordering is specific to one published drawing style, but two buildings cannot establish robustness across sources. 

Frozen corrections rather than selective reruns. Natural-23-v2 uses a predeclared correction overlay only for unusable response sources: 41 model–condition instances across the three models, with 39 replacement responses and two terminal provider errors. The overlay may replace the response source, but not the condition, prompt, images, output schema, or denominator. Original responses and correction artifacts remain linked in the run lock (Appendix A), preventing post-hoc removal of difficult items. 

Human-study presentation. Collection of the three complete sessions spanned a repair to inline image fitting and lightbox pan/zoom; exact per-item exposure to the pre- and post-repair interfaces was not logged. The deployed study-document hash and controlled asset-manifest hash still match launch, so frozen questions and image assets did not change. The presentation defect may nevertheless have made peripheral details harder to inspect. We therefore use the human results only as conservative evidence of pilot feasibility, not to attribute errors to spatial cognition or compute a clean model–human gap. These checks address several engineering explanations, but none is a mechanism experiment. 13 Our conclusion remains behavioral: success with closed or marked answers does not guarantee explicit grounding. Explanations about internal representations remain open. 

# 6 Limitations 

1. Three-participant human pilot, not a human ceiling. Two architecture students with five years of architectural-drawing experience and one architecture PhD with eight years completed the frozen 200-item protocol. Their results are descriptive individual feasibility checks, not a population estimate or an inferential model–human gap. Collection spanned the image-fitting and pan/zoom presentation repair described in section 5, and exact per-item interface exposure was not logged. 2. Three models. The panel includes one frontier route and two open-weight models. Our claims apply to these systems, not to model classes in general. A broader panel is deferred to v2. 3. No pure Matching–Registration contrast. The categorical families differ in items, prompts, and response spaces. Their profile cannot establish that a matched Registration requirement causes a decrement or that Matching and Registration are separable internal mechanisms. A pre-registered same-item construct probe is required for that claim. 4. Single inference pass. The main results use one response per condition under provider-default decoding, plus a frozen correction overlay for unusable sources. Model sampling variance, repeated inference, and multi-seed statistical analysis remain outside the present study. 5. Rendering lineage. The paired text-suppressed study belongs to the historical root lineage; Natural-23-v2 changed the element-matching prompt and is an independent root. The paper reports the valid within-lineage rendering gap but does not compare the suppressed score directly with Natural-23-v2. 6. Interface interventions are compound. Candidate markup and coordinate grids change both the visual evidence and the output burden. They measure practical interface support but do not isolate detection, search, numeric conversion, or reasoning as a single causal mechanism. 7. Source and target dependence. Natural-23-v2 contains 23 buildings, Grounding-200 is drawn from the available annotated targets, the named-layer check uses one building, and GNI uses two buildings from one BIM series. Lineage and anchor clustering limit effective independence. 8. Release constraints. Wild source rasters cannot be redistributed. Reproduction of those items depends on source URLs and hashes, and URLs may decay. Redistributable Core derivatives retain their source-specific attribution and ShareAlike requirements. 9. Not an end-to-end 3D-modeling-agent benchmark. CrossProjection does not test command execution, persistent object handles, edit planning, constraint propagation, artifact validity, or professional design quality. Success on this benchmark is neither necessary for every structured modeling system nor sufficient for reliable design practice. 14 7 Ethics Statement 

All study participants provided informed consent before taking part. The human study was administered at the Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, and conducted in accordance with the applicable institutional ethics determination. Records included in any later public release will use anonymous study identifiers and will exclude access credentials, network identifiers, and free-text note contents. The three-participant result is reported only as a feasibility reference, not as a population-level human ceiling. 

# 8 Release and Data Availability 

We plan to publish the accompanying materials in a subsequent revision after license and packaging review. The release will include the paper source, task manifests, redistributable annotations and licensed Core assets, Wild source URLs and hashes, model responses, scoring code, canonical summaries, and snapshot/run locks. Wild source images will not be redistributed. FreeFarmhouse derivatives will retain the applicable source-file CC BY-SA 3.0 or 4.0 obligations, and GNI-derived materials will retain upstream CC BY 4.0 attribution. 

# 9 Conclusion 

CrossProjection tests how vision-language models relate architectural plans, sections, and elevations through marked Matching, sheet-level Registration, and explicit Geometric Grounding. Across 23 natural buildings, GPT-5.5 outperforms the two open models tested, although all three achieve useful categorical scores. The matched 200-target study shows a different pattern: candidate selection may remain workable even when free localization of points, regions, and especially lines is poor. A coordinate grid recovers some strict point precision for GPT but does not improve line localization. Three architecture-trained participants complete the frozen pilot with high categorical accuracy, and their FF-50 scores indicate that the point-click interface is feasible. The pilot is not a population-level ceiling. Our evidence supports a practical warning rather than a claim about internal mechanisms: success with closed choices or marked elements does not entail reliable explicit geometric grounding. Evaluations of drawing-guided 3D modeling systems, including CAD/BIM agents, should therefore include candidate-free spatial outputs and retain enough provenance to audit them. Future work will expand the human cohort and model coverage, add repeated inference, and introduce a pure same-item Matching–Registration probe. 

# References 

[1] Yu-Yang Chen and Lan-Zhe Guo. Triviewbench: Controlled complexity scaling for multi-view structural reasoning in mllms, 2026. [2] Aleksei Kondratenko, Mussie Birhane, Houssame E. Hsain, and Guido Maciocci. Aecv-bench: Benchmarking multimodal models on architectural and engineering drawings understanding, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.04819 .[3] Qian Kou, Xiaofeng Shi, Yulin Li, Xiaosong Qiu, Xinyang Wang, Hua Zhou, and Dongxing Cao. Mechvqa: Benchmarking and enhancing multimodal LLMs on comprehensive mechanical drawing understanding, 2026. Accepted at ICML 2026. 15 [4] Hyunjun Lee, Suhyung Jang, Junghun Lee, H. David Jeong, and Ghang Lee. Automated BIM generation from inconsistent multi-view raster architectural drawings with missing dimensions. 

Automation in Construction , 187:106971, 2026. doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2026.106971. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2026.106971 .[5] Pengyang Li, Hainan Chen, Zhuang Zheng, Juntao He, and Hai Yang. ArchPlanVQA: Bench-mark and comprehensive evaluation of vision-language models for understanding architectural floor plan CAD drawings. Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering , 40(5):04026060, 2026. doi: 10.1061/JCCEE5.CPENG-7571. [6] Harsh Mankodiya, Chase Gallik, Theodoros Galanos, and Andriy Mulyar. Aec-bench: Amultimodal benchmark for agentic systems in architecture, engineering, and construction, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.29199 .[7] Ke Niu, Zhuofan Chen, Haiyang Yu, Yuwen Chen, Teng Fu, Mengyang Zhao, Bin Li, and Xiangyang Xue. CReFT-CAD: Boosting orthographic projection reasoning for CAD via reinforcement fine-tuning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00568 .[8] Lukas Petersson, Axel Backlund, Hanna Petersson, Axel Wennström, Callum Sharrock, and Arash Dabiri. Blueprint-bench: Comparing spatial intelligence of LLMs, agents and image models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.25229 .[9] Qirui Shen, Wenda Wang, Jiachen Lu, Zilong Huang, Jin Bai, Lei He, Hongxuan Chen, and Weixin Huang. ArchSIBench: Benchmarking the architectural spatial intelligence of vision-language models, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.20837 .[10] Shanmukha Vellamcheti, Uday Kiran Kothapalli, Disharee Bhowmick, and Sathyanarayanan N. Aakur. CVT-Bench: Counterfactual viewpoint transformations reveal unstable spatial repre-sentations in multimodal LLMs, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.21114 .[11] Yipu Wang, Yuheng Ji, Yuyang Liu, Enshen Zhou, Ziqiang Yang, Yuxuan Tian, Ziheng Qin, Yue Liu, Huajie Tan, Cheng Chi, Zhiyuan Ma, Daniel Dajun Zeng, and Xiaolong Zheng. Towards cross-view point correspondence in vision-language models, 2025. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2512.04686 .[12] Sihan Yang, Runsen Xu, Yiman Xie, Sizhe Yang, Mo Li, Jingli Lin, Chenming Zhu, Xiaochen Chen, Haodong Duan, Xiangyu Yue, Dahua Lin, Tai Wang, and Jiangmiao Pang. MMSI-Bench: A benchmark for multi-image spatial intelligence, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2505. 23764 . Accepted at ICLR 2026. [13] Chun-Hsiao Yeh, Chenyu Wang, Shengbang Tong, Ta-Ying Cheng, Ruoyu Wang, Tianzhe Chu, Yuexiang Zhai, Yubei Chen, Shenghua Gao, and Yi Ma. Seeing from another perspective: Evaluating multi-view understanding in MLLMs, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504. 15280 . Introduces All-Angles Bench. Accepted at AAAI 2026 per authors’ project page. [14] Leyuan Yu, Xiao Tang, Minghao Liu, Xinyuan Li, Xiaokai Bai, Sheng Zhou, Qunshu Lin, Weihao Xuan, and Naoto Yokoya. Mindedit-bench: Benchmarking object-level counterfactual spatial reasoning in VLMs from in-the-wild photos, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.00491 .[15] Shaoxiong Zhan, Yanlin Lai, Zheng Liu, Hai Lin, Shen Li, Xiaodong Cai, Zijian Lin, Wen Huang, and Hai-Tao Zheng. 3viewsense: Spatial and mental perspective reasoning from orthographic views in vision-language models, 2026. Accepted to ICML 2026. 16 [16] Haozhe Zhang, Kaichen Liu, Miaomiao Chen, Lei Li, Shaojie Yang, Cheng Peng, and Hanjie Chen. Benchcad: A comprehensive, industry-standard benchmark for programmatic CAD, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.10865 .

# A Ground-Truth and Run Provenance 

Two GT production paths. Native and Wild drawings use manually placed sheet geometry: component anchors, room polygons, cut lines, sightlines, and drawing crops. GNI begins with IFC component identity and view projection, followed by architectural review of the repairs, visibility, and exported drawings. We report the two paths separately rather than treating them as interchangeable data splits. 

Rendered-item QA. Grounding-200 and Grid-200 were rendered before model calls and reviewed through family-specific contact sheets and per-item reference images. Automated checks verify condition counts, unique IDs, ordered image files, target bindings, answer-free public manifests, coordinate bounds, and rendering recipes. Snapshot generation refuses missing or hash-mismatched inputs. 

Correction overlay. The original plan contains 1,469 fresh calls and 485 provenance-verified legacy responses per model. Scoring identified unusable response sources, so a frozen overlay targeted 28 GPT, one Qwen, and 12 GLM conditions. It obtained 28, one, and ten replacement responses, leaving two GLM terminal provider errors. The overlay changes only the canonical response source; it cannot change a condition ID, prompt, ordered images, output schema, GT, or denominator. Qwen’s replacement remains an invalid model output and is scored incorrect, as are the two terminal GLM errors. 

Immutable lineage audit. The historical root snapshot, its additive Grid extension, and the independent Natural-23-v2 root are immutable. The canonical run lock verifies their bytes, parent/predecessor relations, and every materialized experiment payload. Changes to source scripts or project documentation after a historical freeze are recorded as support-file drift. Any change to a selected question, input image, GT/annotation payload, raw response, score, or summary fails validation. This keeps the historical snapshot fixed while allowing the surrounding repository to evolve. 17 Figure 5: Evidence lineage and permitted comparisons. Solid links indicate within-lineage pairing or a valid additive extension; gray dashed links indicate sampling or contextual relations only. The red break marks the prompt change between the historical predecessor and the independent Natural-23-v2 root, across which no score difference is reported. GNI is a separately reported source-modality control. Human-200 is a feasibility protocol assembled from three disclosed samples, not a population-level ceiling. This is a provenance map rather than a pooling graph. 18 Errata policy. Future corrections will create a versioned lineage or correction artifact rather than silently replace an adopted file. Superseded values remain attributed to the release in which they were reported. 

# B Reproducibility 

B.1 Model routes 

Table 6: Evaluation routes. Exact request metadata, returned model strings, and response identifiers are retained in the canonical run lock. Sampling parameters are not pinned by the harness and therefore follow provider defaults.             

> Paper label Requested model Route Reasoning setting GPT-5.5 gpt-5.5 Codex/ChatGPT OAuth route default Qwen3-VL-32B Qwen/Qwen3-VL-32B-Instruct SiliconFlow Instruct GLM-4.5V zai-org/GLM-4.5V SiliconFlow thinking disabled

Every condition is submitted independently. The runners checkpoint raw responses and request metadata for each condition, and resumption targets only missing or failed rows. Provider retries, correction calls, and terminal errors remain visible instead of being collapsed into a final answer file. 

B.2 Scoring 

Natural-23-v2 uses all-target accuracy. A task-compatible verdict is scored against its family GT; an incompatible or missing verdict is incorrect. Strict two-line compliance is a separate formatting metric. Grounding uses the fixed point/region and line metrics in subsection 3.3. Candidate accuracy uses the exact randomized label and reports item-specific uniform chance. Grid effects are paired by condition and shown separately for point/region and line targets. 

B.3 Detailed Grounding and Grid values 

Table 7: Grounding-200 Readout II / Readout III results (%), shown as candidate exact accuracy / free PCK@.05. Element, Tri-view, and Room/window use point or region PCK@.05; Section/facade uses mean endpoint PCK@.05 for lines. Each column contains 50 targets. Candidate chance is item-specific and is not shared with free localization. 

Model Rendering Element Section/facade Tri-view Room/window GPT-5.5 Natural 76.0 / 68.0 88.0 / 22.0 82.0 / 76.0 82.0 / 54.0 GPT-5.5 Text-suppressed 66.0 / 78.0 68.0 / 20.0 70.0 / 70.0 68.0 / 48.0 Qwen3-VL-32B Natural 34.0 / 8.0 20.0 / 4.0 24.0 / 10.0 44.0 / 8.0 Qwen3-VL-32B Text-suppressed 36.0 / 12.0 22.0 / 0.0 24.0 / 0.0 42.0 / 8.0 GLM-4.5V Natural 32.0 / 36.0 34.0 / 0.0 42.0 / 14.0 50.0 / 16.0 GLM-4.5V Text-suppressed 40.0 / 28.0 22.0 / 2.0 18.0 / 14.0 38.0 / 28.0 

19 Table 8: Matched Grid-minus-no-Grid effects in percentage points, pooled over Natural and text-suppressed conditions but separated by geometry kind. Point/region targets contribute 300 matched pairs per model and lines 100. Positive values favor the grid.                

> Model Point/region ∆PCK@.02 Point/region ∆PCK@.05 Line ∆endpoint PCK@.05 GPT-5.5 +19.7 +4.0 -4.0 Qwen3-VL-32B +2.0 +4.0 -1.0 GLM-4.5V +2.7 +0.7 +0.0

B.4 Human-reference provenance 

The human reference uses the frozen 200-item study document and includes only participants who completed all 200 items. The canonical summary records the participant-flow rule, schedule assignment, aggregate scores, study-document hash, asset-manifest hash, source-export hash, and scorer hash. It also preserves the original participant-dropdown background fields alongside the project-owner-confirmed analysis backgrounds. The response archive prepared for a later public release is redacted: access credentials, network identifiers, and free-text note contents are removed, while question identifiers, answers, timing fields, and note-presence indicators are retained. The Natural categorical subset follows its predecessor prompt lineage and is not merged with Natural-23-v2. The FF-50 click task is not treated as validation of the full line-inclusive Grounding-200 protocol. 

B.5 Locks and generated paper artifacts 

The frozen project package behind this manuscript contains three snapshot locks and one canonical runs lock. We plan to publish them with the accompanying artifacts in a subsequent revision: 

• manifests/snapshot.lock.json ;

• manifests/snapshot.grid-200.lock.json ;

• manifests/lineages/natural-23-v2/snapshot.lock.json ; and 

• manifests/runs.lock.json .The locks use repository-relative paths and SHA-256 records; they do not rely on a latest-directory convention. All empirical LaTeX tables are regenerated from the canonical machine-readable summaries, including the separately frozen human-reference summary, by: 

python scripts/make_paper_tables.py 

All manuscript figures are regenerated from frozen summaries, scored item-level rows, private geometry GT, and redistributable FreeFarmhouse drawings by: 

python scripts/make_cross_projection_paper_figures.py 

The English manuscript builds with pdfLaTeX and BibTeX; the bilingual reading copy builds with XeLaTeX and BibTeX. Generated PDFs and temporary files are kept outside the manuscript source directory. 20